We're continuing on with college. Okay. Every
time they would organize some kind of a protest, I
would wear my uniform.
I got in with the small veterans club they had on
campus, and they voted to allow me to go in to join
the club, even though I was not out of the service,
and I was an officer. They had two strikes against
me, but they allowed me to go ahead and join. On one
particular occasion the students were going to
take down the flag in front of the administration
building.
So we got ourselves organized and we made a roster
of who had which classes at which times and we
posted guards on the flag all day long and the flag
didn't come down. We had lots of debates in the
student union and I'm not sure I convinced anybody
of my way of thinking I'm not sure they convinced
me, but it was active
in terms of participation on both sides. I was the
only active duty army person on the whole campus.
At the end of two years I knew about half of them and
they all knew me.
Did you get into any real major blows, not
physically, but verbal blows? Oh, yes. I was
called, you know, a baby murderer to, you know,
anything that was going along. And you got a lot of
that wash over and debate them at whatever level
you felt best at. The only time I ever really lost, I
was invited to come into one of the It
was in the history department. A guy by the name of
Joe Carter, whom I had known for many years, was one
of the professors.
Asked me if I would come in and be a guest speaker
since Vietnam seemed to be a topic of greatest
interest with all of the students. And I could
pretty well hold my own in a debate with any of the
undergraduates. But when I walked into this
classroom, I found that not only do we have all of
the undergraduates, we've got all of the graduate
students and all of the faculty in this room.
Well, I did all right until I ended up taking on the
head of the history department. And I lost that
one. Regardless of what I said, the dean of the
history department carried more weight than
Undergraduate, Lee Johnson.
You later went on to teach ROTC at Nevada
University? Mm-hmm. After I finished up my degree
at Adams State, I went to Benning for 10 months,
finished a infantry officer's advance course.
and then got an assignment out to the University of
Nevada, Reno as an ROTC instructor. We had five
guys there.
Reno was a unique campus. It was liberal in its
ideas to some degree and its proximity to
California, and yet it was far enough away from
Berkeley that we didn't have the violent
protesting. We had a fairly active ROTC
department.
It was a land grant college, and every able-bodied
male freshman was required to take one semester of
ROTC. We did not put these in uniform. This was
strictly academic. Here's what the Army's all, or
the military's all about. We taught Army, Navy,
Air Force, Although
there was no Army, I mean Navy or Air Force ROTC
detachment, they were just Army, but because we
were the only one there we taught cross service.
If they elected to come in and take ROTC after that,
then we would put them in uniform and they had to
make drills and all that, but for the freshmen we
didn't do all that. It was a trying and a rewarding
experience. The kids were the right age. They had
cut the relical cord from their parents, and yet
they were still hungry for some kind of adult
guidance. They were moldable,
enthusiastic,
questioning, and bright, and they would suck as
much of your time as you would absolutely give
them.
many of the kids I graduated from there I later
served with. It was probably one of the best three
years I ever spent in terms of
being able to leave your stamp on the service.
You have
anything you'd like to expound on or in what regard
just overall your whole period how has it affected
your life how have you continued if you had to cope
with it see I after my second tour I had nightmares
for a little while over that one particular
incident that we discussed earlier and finally
one day I got out a bunch of maps and I went over the
whole scenario and decided that Given the
information I had at the time, I would have done
everything exactly the same. And after that, I
didn't have any problems dealing with it.
Understand that by this time I, well, by the time I
finished up my second tour, I decided I was going to
be a career officer.
I was very good at what I was doing. I liked leading
troops. And I did it well. I don't think any other
single person could have done it with any less
casualties than I did.
And I still had no qualms about being in Vietnam in
terms of fighting at war other than the fact that I
think we could have won if they had turned us loose.
Or if they decided it was not winnable, then we
shouldn't have gotten in there. And I can't blame
that on the troops or the country. While I was at
UNR, Vietnam fell. And there was a graduate
student there who was Vietnamese, whom everybody
loved. And when the country fell, he was cut off. He
had no place to go. His family was still back in
Vietnam and all that. And everybody felt very
sorry for him, except me.
And nobody could understand that. And I said,
look, For eight years this kid has been in the
United States going to college. Well, I have spent
more time in the last eight years in his country
than he has. If he was so worried about Vietnam, he
should have been over there packing a rifle, not
over here hiding and going to college.
I have no desire to ever go back and see Vietnam
again.
And it was a beautiful country. We messed it up a
lot.
By the time we got through with that country, you
could not go half a mile in any direction without
seeing a very big hole in the ground left by a bomb
somewhere.
Sure, eventually the bomb craters had fell down
and they rebuilt part of the country, At one time,
Wayne was a beautiful city.
And by the time the NBA and us got through with it, it
was mostly rubble. But I remember seeing Europe
when I was over there as a dependent in 1948. And
now you can't see any or very few scars of the war
left in Europe.
I'd like to ask you a question. What do you know
about the Mealy incident? I knew Rusty Cowley a
little bit from the ranger department. He and I
were both in the ranger department at Fort Benning
when most of the major investigations in the
states were created
and he was assigned over to building four at Fort
Benning which is a big administration building
where he spent most of his time preparing his
defense with his lawyer. I was at Fort Bedding
where the My Lai court-martial was taking place
and was there all the time while he was basically
under house arrest after the court-martial
waiting for the appeal process to take place.
I'm convinced of a number of things. Number one,
Rusty Calley was guilty of sin. He was tried by a
board of officers who had all been to Vietnam, who
all understood the problems of command, who
understood the problems of Vietnam, and they
found him guilty.
The problem with Calley and the My Lai is more basic
than an individual. He was an OCS product. He was 20
years old when the incident occurred. He had not a
degree nor very much military background. He was
in a unit that had been put together from a lot of
different units into a division, so there was not
the real history of a unit. It had a lot of growing
pains. They were also in an area that was primarily
a pacification program, so they didn't have
clear-cut enemy as much as they would go into what
was supposedly a friendly village and they would
take some horrendous losses when they finally get
into the village there wouldn't be anybody there
everybody would say oh they were friendly and you
had men women and children
the repetition of this over a long time caused a
great deal of frustration and I think not only
amongst the leaders by amongst the troops. I
basically think that he just kind of went berserk
one day. What he did was absolutely wrong. In any
military conflict, there's going to be civilians
that get hurt. My standing orders to my troops used
to be whenever we had to deal with a civilian
populace, which was not very often, If you see
somebody running after you've told them to stand
still, and we had Vietnamese interpreters and
loudspeakers to do that, you shoot.
The troops, when they go into a village, don't have
time to ask questions. They don't have time to look
real hard to see whether it's a guy's got a weapon or
it's a 17-year-old kid or it's a 13-year-old kid.
You can't tell the difference when they're
moving. And it's very much like a policeman. He
walks outside of a bank, and he knows the bank's
being robbed, and he sees somebody run out the door
real quick, and he yells to him to halt, and he
doesn't halt. The policeman will probably shoot.
But if the guy stops, and he lines him up against the
wall, and then shoots him, that's murder.
Basically, that's what Kelly did. He said after
they had captured these people, they shot them.
And a bunch of them.
The primary reason for having officers is to
ensure that units operate within the realm of law.
Small units like platoons can operate probably as
well under an NCO as they can under a platoon leader
or a platoon commander. But that is the training
ground for higher ranking officers. and is to
ensure that units operate within the scope of the
law. Cali had neither the training nor the
maturity nor the experience to carry that
through.
You feel that reflected on the Army Officer Corps?
Most definitely.
Cali was probably not the only one
Our officer corps expanded tremendously in a
period of a few years. I was responsible for
producing some of those lieutenants. I ran an OCS
company on a number of occasions. I tried to bounce
out people whom I thought would not be good
officers. And as an OCS company commander, I
submitted reports to an evaluation board that
generally consisted of a lieutenant colonel, two
majors, and a couple of captains.
They had to make an evaluation based on my reports
and their interview with the prospective
lieutenant of whether or not he would or would not
remain in the program. Many times, my evaluation
and recommendation was overruled. And one day I
finally got mad and walked into the board and
talked to the president of the board about, I would
not have this character as one of my platoon
leaders. And he said, I understand what you're
saying, Captain Johnson, but in many cases a
lieutenant is better than no lieutenant. And I
said, yeah, but I would rather have a sergeant
running it. He said, yeah, but we don't have
sergeants either. I talked to you earlier about
the NCO academy. that our army had expanded so fast
in such a short period of time that we had neither
good qualified officers or ncos that understood
and it doesn't come from reading a book but from the
deep tradition bound understanding that comes
with being a part of a unit and watching and
observing superiors
that kind of understanding comes from.
I remember digging out all those letters. He wrote
me every day. Were you ever accused or had any
experience with other war atrocities that took
place?
I, well I was in the advanced course, one of the
young E-5s that had been in my company during my
tenure. And understand that when I took over my
company,
in the six month period before me, they had five
company commanders. All of them had been shot out
from under the company. The company that I was in
was involved in a way during the test. and they had
two company commanders in less than three weeks.
One of these characters got out and joined the
Vietnam Veterans Against the War and had made a
number of allegations about the company
commanders that he had served under. I got called
out of the advance course and reported out of the
Provo Marshal's office to be interviewed, and the
list of allegations ran from murder to petty
theft. After submitting my affidavit and
answering all the questions on tape, charges were
later dropped. It wasn't really a charge at this
point in time. They were doing what they call an
Article 32 investigation. There's a civilian
name for it. I can't remember what it is, but
basically it is a preliminary investigation to
determine whether or not there is a basis for
initiating court martial proceedings.
The investigation later resulted in them
dropping all the charges because they found out
that this kid was basically just trying to raise
dust. But it was enough to strike terror in my heart
because at that point in time, in 1970, merely
being accused was enough to ruin one's career. How
did you control your troops when they do get angry
from having their buddies blown away? How do you
control them from committing such atrocity? By
example and by letting them know absolutely that
nothing will happen. On one occasion, I think I
mentioned to you when the tape was off, we had, we
were moving through an area where we had killed a
lot of people.
We had used artillery as well as mortars and I came
across, I usually ran my company command group
right behind the first platoon and then I would
have two platoons either out on the flank or behind
me and the mortar platoon behind me. And somebody
had taken a bamboo stake or just a piece of bamboo
and had chopped it off with a machete and taken a
head of an NVA soldier that had been severed with
what looked like artillery but some kind of a
fragment and had shoved it down on top of this
bamboo stake and put a first calf patch in the
mouth. Well the NVA were predominantly Buddhist
and the Buddhists were very superstitious or what
we consider to be superstition in that if their
body wasn't whole or at least together I mean all
the parts of it in the burial place that they
couldn't go to heaven and that used to really
caused serious morale problems with the NVA. And
it became common for many troops to leave either
human patches or an ace of spades or something on
the bodies as a calling card for the guys that came
in and picked up the bodies later. And it was a
psychological game. I simply got my lieutenants
to put out the word. I didn't want to know who did
that, but I didn't want to ever see it again, and it
never happened. As long as the river is in command,
we'll put out the word that what is acceptable as
norms, the troops will fall in line with that. And
occasionally if somebody gets out a little bit,
you bring it back into the fold.
Okay. Do you have anything else you want to add on
this topic?
I think every every time
This has been an interview with retired Army
Lieutenant Colonel Lee Leonard C. Johnson. His
awards consist of one Silver Star, seven Bronze
Stars, Air Medal, two Purple Hearts. He served the
Army from March 1963 to April 1984. He served two
tours in Vietnam from July 1966 to July 1967 and
August of 1968 to August 1969. He presently
resides in Temple, Texas with his wife and two
children.